README.md, before:

# Private Linear Algebra book

## CAPITAL calls

> [!NOTE]
> **Bold**
> 
> Useful information that users should know, even when skimming content.

> [!TIP]
> Helpful advice for doing things better or more easily.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Key information users need to know to achieve their goal.

> [!WARNING]
> Urgent info that needs immediate user attention to avoid problems.

> [!CAUTION]
> Advises about risks or negative outcomes of certain actions.


> [!OEPS]
> Advises about risks or negative outcomes of certain actions.

## Lowercase calls

> [!note]
> **Bold**
> 
> Useful information that users should know, even when skimming content.

> [!tip]
> Helpful advice for doing things better or more easily.

> [!important]
> Key information users need to know to achieve their goal.

> [!warning]
>
> Urgent info that needs immediate user attention to avoid problems.

> [!caution]
> Advises about risks or negative outcomes of certain actions.


> [!OEPS]
> Advises about risks or negative outcomes of certain actions.

Commit message:

Update alert call examples and docstring details
Expanded README to include examples of alert calls with different capitalizations. Clarified the docstring in sphinx_github_alerts to specify allowed alert types.

README.md, after:

# Private Linear Algebra book

## Full capital calls

> [!NOTE]
> **Bold**
> 
> Useful information that users should know, even when skimming content.

> [!TIP]
> Helpful advice for doing things better or more easily.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Key information users need to know to achieve their goal.

> [!WARNING]
> Urgent info that needs immediate user attention to avoid problems.

> [!CAUTION]
> Advises about risks or negative outcomes of certain actions.


> [!OEPS]
> Advises about risks or negative outcomes of certain actions.

## Full lowercase calls

> [!note]
> **Bold**
> 
> Useful information that users should know, even when skimming content.

> [!tip]
> Helpful advice for doing things better or more easily.

> [!important]
> Key information users need to know to achieve their goal.

> [!warning]
>
> Urgent info that needs immediate user attention to avoid problems.

> [!caution]
> Advises about risks or negative outcomes of certain actions.


> [!oeps]
> Advises about risks or negative outcomes of certain actions.


## Lowercase with capital first letter calls

> [!Note]
> **Bold**
> 
> Useful information that users should know, even when skimming content.

> [!Tip]
> Helpful advice for doing things better or more easily.

> [!Important]
> Key information users need to know to achieve their goal.

> [!Warning]
>
> Urgent info that needs immediate user attention to avoid problems.

> [!Caution]
> Advises about risks or negative outcomes of certain actions.


> [!Oeps]
> Advises about risks or negative outcomes of certain actions.
